Newsletters: add 349 (2025-04-11) (#2261)
bitcoinops/bitcoinops.github.io: _posts/en/newsletters/2025-04-11-newsletter.md

  Falbesoner [posted][falbesoner ss1] to Delving Bitcoin a sample
  implementation and performance results for _SwiftSync_, an idea
  [proposed][somsen ssgist] by Ruben Somsen during a recent Bitcoin Core
  developers meeting.  As of writing, the [most recent results][falbesoner
  ss2] posted in the thread show a 5.28x speed up of _initial block
  download_ (IBD) over Bitcoin Core's default IBD settings (which use
  [assumevalid][]), reducing the initial sync time from about 41 hours
  to about 8 hours.

  Before using SwiftSync, someone who has already synced their node to
  a recent block creates a _hints file_ that indicates which transaction
  outputs will be a part of the UTXO set at that block (i.e., which
  outputs will be unspent).  This can be efficiently encoded to a few
  hundred megabytes for the current UTXO set size.  The hints file also
  indicates what block it was generated at, which we'll call the
  _terminal SwiftSync block_.

  The user performing SwiftSync downloads the hints file and uses it
  when processing each block prior to the terminal SwiftSync block to
  only store outputs in the UTXO database if the hints file indicates

>   that the output will remain be a part of UTXO set when the terminal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that the output will remain in the UTXO set when the terminal
```

  accumulator][].  Every spent output is removed from the accumulator.
  When the node reaches the terminal SwiftSync block, it ensures the
  accumulator is empty, meaning every output seen was later spent.  If
  that fails, it means that the hints file was incorrect and that IBD
  needs to be performed again from scratch without using SwiftSync.  In
  this way, users do not need to trust the creator of the hints file---a
  malicious file cannot result in an incorrect UTXO state; it can only
  waste a few hours of the user's computing resources.

  An additional property of SwiftSync that has not yet been implemented
  is allowing parallel validation of blocks during IBD.  This is
  possible because assumevalid does not check the scripts of older
  blocks, entries are never removed from UTXO database prior to the
  terminal SwiftSync block, and the accumulator used only tracks the net
  effect of outputs being added (created) and removed (spent).  That
  eliminates any dependencies between blocks before the terminal
  SwiftSync block.  Parallel validation during IBD is also a feature of
  [Utreexo][topic utreexo] for some of the same reasons.

>   Discussion examined several aspects of the proposal.  Falbesoner's

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The discussion examined several aspects of the proposal.  Falbesoner's
```

  original implementation used the [MuHash][] accumulator (see
  [Newsletter #123][news123 muhash]), which [has been shown][wuille
  muhash] to be resistant to the [generalized birthday attack][].
  Somsen [described][somsen ss1] an alternative approach that may be
  faster.  Falbesoner questioned whether the alternative approach was
  cryptographically secure but, since it was simple, implemented it
  anyway and found it further sped up SwiftSync.

  James O'Beirne [asked][obeirne ss] whether SwiftSync is useful given

>   that [assumeUTXO][topic assumeutxo] provides an even larger speed up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that [assumeUTXO][topic assumeutxo] provides an even larger speed-up.
```

  Somsen [replied][somsen ss2] that SwiftSync speeds up assumeUTXO's
  background validation, making it a nice addition for users of
  assumeUTXO.  He further notes that anyone who downloads assumeUTXO's

>   required data (the UTXO database at a certain block) doesn't need a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  required data (the UTXO database at a particular block) doesn't need a
```

  separate hints file if they use that same block as the terminal
  SwiftSync block.

  Vojtěch Strnad, 0xB10C, and Somsen [discussed][b10c ss] compressing

>   the hint file data, with an expected savings of about 75% bringing the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  the hint file data, with an expected savings of about 75%, bringing the
```

%}

## Releases and release candidates

_New releases and release candidates for popular Bitcoin infrastructure
projects.  Please consider upgrading to new releases or helping to test
release candidates._

- [Bitcoin Core 29.0rc3][] is a release candidate for the next major
  version of the network's predominate full node.  Please see the
  [version 29 testing guide][bcc29 testing guide].

- [LND 0.19.0-beta.rc2][] is a release candidate for this popular LN
  node.  One of the major improvements that could probably use testing
  is the new RBF-based fee bumping for cooperative closes.

<!-- FIXME:harding to update Thursday -->

## Notable code and documentation changes

_Notable recent changes in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo],
[Lightning BLIPs][blips repo], [Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition
repo], and [BINANAs][binana repo]._

> - [LDK #2256][] and [LDK #3709][] implements attributable failures (see

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [LDK #2256][] and [LDK #3709][] together implement attributable failures (see
```
(not sure if the word together should be there)

---
title: 'Bitcoin Optech Newsletter #349'
permalink: /en/newsletters/2025/04/11/
name: 2025-04-11-newsletter
slug: 2025-04-11-newsletter
type: newsletter
layout: newsletter
lang: en
---
This week's newsletter FIXME:harding

## News

> - **SwiftSync speed up for initial block download:** Sebastian

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **SwiftSync speedup for initial block download:** Sebastian
```

  Falbesoner [posted][falbesoner ss1] to Delving Bitcoin a sample
  implementation and performance results for _SwiftSync_, an idea
  [proposed][somsen ssgist] by Ruben Somsen during a recent Bitcoin Core
  developers meeting.  As of writing, the [most recent results][falbesoner
  ss2] posted in the thread show a 5.28x speed up of _initial block

>   download_ (IBD) over Bitcoin Core's default IBD settings (which use

Author: I don't think so.  Current tip is 891,857, so it's a ~5% difference is number of blocks.  It's probably a bit more of a difference in total data and number of outputs ('cause early blocks were emptier on average), but it doesn't seem worth complicating our summary.

## Notable code and documentation changes

_Notable recent changes in [Bitcoin Core][bitcoin core repo], [Core
Lightning][core lightning repo], [Eclair][eclair repo], [LDK][ldk repo],
[LND][lnd repo], [libsecp256k1][libsecp256k1 repo], [Hardware Wallet
Interface (HWI)][hwi repo], [Rust Bitcoin][rust bitcoin repo], [BTCPay
Server][btcpay server repo], [BDK][bdk repo], [Bitcoin Improvement
Proposals (BIPs)][bips repo], [Lightning BOLTs][bolts repo],
[Lightning BLIPs][blips repo], [Bitcoin Inquisition][bitcoin inquisition
repo], and [BINANAs][binana repo]._

- [LDK #2256][] and [LDK #3709][] implements attributable failures (see
  Newsletter [#224][news224 failures]) as specified in [BOLTs #1044][] by adding an optional
  `attribution_data` field to the `UpdateFailHTLC` struct and introducing the
  `AttributionData` struct. In this protocol, each forwarding node appends to
  the failure message a `hop_payload` flag, a duration field that records how
  long the node held the HTLC, and HMACs corresponding to different assumed
  positions in the route. If a node corrupts the failure message, the mismatch
  in the HMAC chain helps identify the pair of nodes between which this

>   happened. In addition, if a node holds an HTLC for too long, it can also be

Reviewer 3: @Gustavojfe if you have a second can you point out where the PRs mention this last sentence of penalty? Just seemed like an odd thing to be in here and in skimming the PRs I didnt see it

Reviewer 4: thanks for your feedback. I misunderstood, you're right there isn't a penalty imposed in the PR or in this protocol.

I modified the sentence to reflect that one could potentially do so.

"In addition, tracking HTLC hold times allows a node to penalize a routing node for excessive delay."

>   allow a node to penalize a routing node for excessive delay.

Author: I couldn't find a source for this quote in a quick search of the four sources we linked (two LDK PRs, news224, BOLTs 1044) or a web search, so I'm going to remove it.  Sorry if the source is just staring me in the face.

- [LND #9669][] downgrades [simple taproot channels][topic simple taproot
  channels] to always use the legacy cooperative close flow, even if the
  [RBF][topic rbf] cooperative close flow (see Newsletter [#347][news347 coop])
  is configured. Previously, a node that had both features configured would fail
  to start up.

- [Rust Bitcoin #4302][] adds a new `push_relative_lock_time()` method to the
  script builder API, which takes a relative [timelock][topic timelocks]
  parameter, and deprecates `push_sequence()` which takes a raw sequence number
  as a parameter. This change resolves a potential confusion where developers
  would mistakenly push a raw sequence number in scripts instead of a relative

>   timelock value, which is then checked against a transaction’s sequence numbers
>   by `CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  timelock value, which is then checked against an input's sequence number
  using `CHECKSEQUENCEVERIFY`.
```

{% include snippets/recap-ad.md when="2025-04-15 15:30" %}
{% include references.md %}
{% include linkers/issues.md v=2 issues="2256,3709,9669,4302,1044" %}
[bitcoin core 29.0rc3]: https://bitcoincore.org/bin/bitcoin-core-29.0/
[bcc29 testing guide]: https://github.com/bitcoin-core/bitcoin-devwiki/wiki/29.0-Release-Candidate-Testing-Guide
[lnd 0.19.0-beta.rc2]: https://github.com/lightningnetwork/lnd/releases/tag/v0.19.0-beta.rc2
[wuille muhash]: https://lists.linuxfoundation.org/pipermail/bitcoin-dev/2017-May/014337.html.
[falbesoner ss1]: https://delvingbitcoin.org/t/ibd-booster-speeding-up-ibd-with-pre-generated-hints-poc/1562/

> [somsen ssgist]: https://gist.github.com/RubenSomsen/82ccd0f913057e05353b437457f68a11

Author: Note for posterity: updating this to Somsen's newer gist posted to the ML.

  is allowing parallel validation of blocks during IBD.  This is
  possible because assumevalid does not check the scripts of older
  blocks, entries are never removed from UTXO database prior to the
  terminal SwiftSync block, and the accumulator used only tracks the net
  effect of outputs being added (created) and removed (spent).  That
  eliminates any dependencies between blocks before the terminal
  SwiftSync block.  Parallel validation during IBD is also a feature of
  [Utreexo][topic utreexo] for some of the same reasons.

  The discussion examined several aspects of the proposal.  Falbesoner's
  original implementation used the [MuHash][] accumulator (see
  [Newsletter #123][news123 muhash]), which [has been shown][wuille
  muhash] to be resistant to the [generalized birthday attack][].
  Somsen [described][somsen ss1] an alternative approach that may be
  faster.  Falbesoner questioned whether the alternative approach was
  cryptographically secure but, since it was simple, implemented it
  anyway and found it further sped up SwiftSync.

  James O'Beirne [asked][obeirne ss] whether SwiftSync is useful given

>   that assumeUTXO provides an even larger speed-up.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  that assumeUTXO provides an even larger speedup.
```
(consistency)

  “ForecasterManager” rather than an “Estimator” and “Fee Estimation
  Manager”?"
  a0="The system predicts future outcomes based on current and past
  data. Unlike an estimator, which approximates present conditions with
  some randomization, a forecaster projects future events, which aligns
  with this system’s predictive nature and its output of
  uncertainty/risk levels."
  a0link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31664#l-19"

  q1="Why is `CBlockPolicyEstimator` not modified to hold the mempool
  reference, similar to the approach in PR #12966? What is the current
  approach and why is it better than holding a reference to mempool?
  (Hint: see PR #28368)"
  a1="`CBlockPolicyEstimator` inherits from `CValidationInterface` and
  implements its virtual methods `TransactionAddedToMempool`,
  `TransactionRemovedFromMempool`, and
  `MempoolTransactionsRemovedForBlock`. This gives
  `CBlockPolicyEstimator` all the mempool information it needs without
  being unnecessarily tightly coupled to the mempool via a reference."
  a1link="https://bitcoincore.reviews/31664#l-26"

  q2="What are the trade-offs between the new architecture and a direct

>   modification of CBlockPolicyEstimator?"

Reviewer 5: Nit, just for consistency.

```suggestion
  modification of `CBlockPolicyEstimator`?"
```
